Bayesian statistics is a subset of the field of statistics in which the evidence
about the true state of the world is expressed in terms of degrees of belief or,
more specifically, Bayesian probabilities. Such an interpretation is only one of
a number of interpretations of probability and there are other statistical
techniques that are not based on "degrees of belief". One formulation of the
"key ideas of Bayesian statistics" is "that probability is orderly opinion, and
that inference from data is nothing other than the revision of such opinion in
the light of relevant new information."[1]

The general set of statistical techniques can be divided into a number of
activities, many of which have special Bayesian versions.

Bayesian inference is an approach to statistical inference, that is distinct
from frequentist inference. It is specifically based on the use of Bayesian
probabilities to summarize evidence.

The formulation of statistical models using Bayesian statistics has the unique
feature of requiring the specification of prior distributions for any unknown
parameters. These prior distributions are as integral to a Bayesian approach to
statistical modelling as the expression of probability distributions. Prior
distributions can be either hyperparameters or hyperprior distributions.

The Bayesian design of experiments includes a concept called 'influence of prior
beliefs'. This approach uses sequential analysis techniques to include the
outcome of earlier experiments in the design of the next experiment. This is
achieved by updating 'beliefs' through the use of prior and posterior
distribution. This allows the design of experiments to make good use of
resources of all types. An example of this is the multi-armed bandit problem.

Statistical graphics includes methods for data exploration, for model
validation, etc. The use of certain modern computational techniques for Bayesian
inference, specifically the various types of Markov chain Monte Carlo
techniques, have led to the need for checks, often made in graphical form, on
the validity of such computations in expressing the required posterior
distributions.
