In mathematical modelling and statistical modelling, there are dependent and independent variables. The models investigate how the former depend on the latter. The dependent variables represent the output or outcome whose variation is being studied. The independent variables represent inputs or causes, i.e. potential reasons for variation. Models test or explain the effects that the independent variables have on the dependent variables. Sometimes, independent variables may be included for other reasons, such as for their potential confounding effect, without a wish to test their effect directly.

In mathematics, a function is a rule for taking an input (usually number or set of numbers)[2] and providing an output (which is also usually a number).[2] A symbol that stands for an arbitrary input is called an independent variable, while a symbol that stands for an arbitrary output is called a dependent variable.[3] The most common symbol for the input is x, and the most common symbol for the output is y; the function itself is commonly written .[3][4]

It is possible to have multiple independent variables and/or multiple dependent variables. For instance, in multivariable calculus, one often encounters functions of the form , where z is an dependent variable and x and y are independent variables.[5] Functions with multiple outputs are often written as vector-valued functions.

In advanced mathematics, a function between a set X and a set Y is a subset of the Cartesian product such that every element of X appears in an ordered pair with exactly one element of Y. In this situation, a symbol representing an element of X may be called a independent variable and a symbol representing an element of Y may be called an dependent variable, such as when X is a manifold and the symbol x represents an arbitrary point in the manifold.[6] However, many advanced textbooks do not distinguish between dependent and independent variables.[7]

In a statistics experiment, the dependent variable is the event studied and expected to change whenever the independent variable is altered.[8]

In data mining tools (for multivariate statistics and machine learning), the depending variable is assigned a role as target variable (or in some tools as label attribute), while a dependent variable may be assigned a role as regular variable.[9] Known values for the target variable are provided for the training data set and test data set, but should be predicted for other data. The target variable is used in supervised learning algorithms but not in non-supervised learning.

In mathematical modelling, the dependent variable is studied to see if and how much it varies as the independent variables vary. In the simple stochastic linear model the term is the i th value of the dependent variable and is i th value of the independent variable. The term is known as the "error" and contains the variability of the dependent variable not explained by the independent variable.

With multiple independent variables, the expression is: , where n is the number of independent variables.

In simulation, the dependent variable is changed in response to changes in the independent variables.

An independent variable is also known as a "predictor variable", "regressor", "controlled variable", "manipulated variable", "explanatory variable", "exposure variable" (see reliability theory), "risk factor" (see medical statistics), "feature" (in machine learning and pattern recognition) or an "input variable."[10][11]

A dependent variable is also known as a "response variable", "regressand", "predicted variable", "measured variable", "explained variable", "experimental variable", "responding variable", "outcome variable", and "output variable".[11]

"Explanatory variable" is preferred by some authors over "independent variable" when the quantities treated as "independent variables" may not be statistically independent.[12][13] If the independent variable is referred to as an "explanatory variable" then the term "response variable" is preferred by some authors for the dependent variable.[11][12][13]

"Explained variable" is preferred by some authors over "dependent variable" when the quantities treated as "dependent variables" may not be statistically dependent.[14] If the dependent variable is referred to as an "explained variable" then the term "predictor variable" is preferred by some authors for the independent variable.[14]

Variables may also be referred to by their form: continuous, binary/dichotomous, nominal categorical, and ordinal categorical, among others.

A variable may be thought to alter the dependent or independent variables, but may not actually be the focus of the experiment. So that variable will be kept constant or monitored to try to minimise its effect on the experiment. Such variables may be designated as either a "controlled variable" , "control variable", or "extraneous variable".

Extraneous variables, if included in a regression as independent variables, may aid a researcher with accurate response parameter estimation, prediction, and goodness of fit, but are not of substantive interest to the hypothesis under examination. For example, in a study examining the effect of post-secondary education on lifetime earnings, some extraneous variables might be gender, ethnicity, social class, genetics, intelligence, age, and so forth. A variable is extraneous only when it can be assumed (or shown) to influence the dependent variable. If included in a regression, it can improve the fit of the model. If it is excluded from the regression and if it has a non-zero covariance with one or more of the independent variables of interest, its omission will bias the regression's result for the effect of that independent variable of interest. This effect is called confounding or omitted variable bias; in these situations, design changes and/or statistical control is necessary.

Extraneous variables are often classified into three types:

In quasi-experiments, differentiating between dependent and other variables may be downplayed in favour of differentiating between those variables that can be altered by the researcher and those that cannot.[citation needed] Variables in quasi-experiments may be referred to as "extraneous variables", "subject variables", "blocking variables", "situational variables", "pseudo-independent variables", "ex post facto variables", "natural group variables" or "non-manipulated variables".

In modelling, variability that is not covered by the independent variable is designated by and is known as the "residual", "side effect", "error", "unexplained share", "residual variable", or "tolerance".